Web of Trust Version 0.4.6 build0020
------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK (detailed changelog is below):

Summary blah blah. Blah blah reference to link [1].

Outlook blah blah.

Thanks to the Cobertura test coverage analysis tool which WoT supports
since the previous release, efforts have begun towards achieving 100%
test coverage in WoT.


CHANGELOG - prefixed with the bugtracker issue number:

- 0000001: [category_of_issue_1] title_of_issue_1.......................
           more_lines_of_title (developer_of_issue_1)...................

  Blah.
  Blah.

- 0000002: .............................................................
           .............................................................
  0000003: .............................................................
           .............................................................

  Blah.
  Blah.

- 0006994: [Performance] IntroductionServer: Fix up to 1.5 hour delay of
           seeing puzzle solutions (xor)

  The identities which publish puzzles check for solutions of them on
  the network every 0.5 to 1.5 hours (randomized delay).

  Unfortunately the code which does this had a bug:
  When generating new puzzles it didn't try to download solutions right
  after uploading the puzzles.
  Instead the solutions would only be downloaded at the next iteration
  of the maintenance loop, i.e. after the said 0.5 to 1.5 hours.
  This could cause a delay of 1.5 hours for new identities to become
  visible after solving a puzzle.

  It was fixed to try to download solutions right away.
  Together with the below fix for issue 0006996 a round-trip time of 5
  minutes for solving a puzzle & the solution being seen by the remote
  identity should be possible now.

- 0006996: [Performance] Fix 10 minute delay of captcha solution upload
           (xor)

  The IntroductionClient had a bug which almost always caused upload of
  catpcha solutions to be delayed by 10 minutes, causing new identities
  to not become visible before that.

  This delay has been reduced to zero.

  Notably this was discovered thanks to the new unit test for puzzle
  up-/download as introduced in this release by issue 0006951.

- 0006835: [Features] Merge random nickname improvement (ArneBab)

  Some very short name templates such as "D" or "CNR" were removed to
  make the names more pleasant.

  Further the wizard for creating identities has been changed to remove
  the following warning:
     "If you don't like it please do not reload the page to generate
      another random name - this also reveals something about your
      preferences!"

  It was removed because:
  - it's nice if users can have a name which they identify with.
  - it seems very difficult for an attacker to even find a place where
    statistics about the name preferences of someone could be
    acquired. Without stats, it is impossible to take good guesses which
    random nicknames belong to whom.

CHANGELOG about stuff only interesting for developers:

- 0006804: [Code quality] Unit tests: Recycle fred simulator code to
           allow tests which do real inserts/fetches (xor)

  Previously WoT unit tests have not been testing the code for
  uploading/downloading to/from the Freenet network at all.
  They only tested the core which processes the transferred data.

  Now unit tests can use the new class AbstractMultiNodeTest to use the
  Freenet core code to create multiple real Freenet instances on the
  local machine which connect to each other, and run the WoT plugin on
  multiple of those nodes to test network traffic between instances of
  WoT.
  This does not involve the public network, all traffic is strictly
  local.

  Surprisingly this does not require much computing power:
  Hundreds of test runs have shown that it does reliably complete with
  only 10 nodes. Dozens of runs validated that it requires as little as
  512 MB of RAM given to Java, it may possibly even work with 256 MB.
  A simple upload/download test run completes within 167 seconds on my
  10 years old 2.4 GHz Core 2 Duo.

  Further, it is nice to know that a simple network-based test only
  takes 150 lines of code to implement.

  This allows us to do really sophisticated high level tests of whether
  WoT works as intended, some of which have already been implemented,
  see the following issues.

- 0006950: [Code quality] Unit tests: Networked tests for classes
           IdentityFetcher and IdentityInserter (xor)

  While the primary goal of this release is to replace the legacy class
  IdentityFetcher with a much faster new implementation (classes
  IdentityDownloader*), the legacy class was nevertheless preserved so
  we can keep it as a reference implementation for a while to have
  something to test the new code against.

  It was decided to use the legacy class as a first subject to test with
  the new code for networked tests as described by the aforementioned
  issue 0006804. It is a good idea to test the legacy class because:
  - it had to be modified by this release to take account for the
    changes to the WoT core which had to be made to power the new
    implementation. These modifications could have caused bugs.
  - it is more easy to understand than the new implementation and thus
    serves well as a simple example of how to do networked tests.

  Class IdentityFetcherTest was added which tests IdentityFetcher -
  and also the IdentityInserter as a side effect - like this:
  - Creates two WoT instances connected by network.
  - Creates an identity on WoT #1 and has the IdentityInserter insert
    it into the local Freenet network.
  - Creates another identity on WoT #2 which adds the remote identity
    by its URI and sets a positive trust to it.
  - Waits until the remote identity is successfully fetched and imported
    by the IdentityFetcher and validates its attributes are equal to the
    original.

  This increases WoT's overall test coverage by lines from 47% to 49%,
  and branch coverage from 40% to 42%.
  (As measured by the Cobertura support which was introduced by the
  previous release, see "ant -projecthelp".)

- 0006895: [Code quality] Unit tests: (Almost) Full coverage for class
           Score (xor)

  This release delivers a rewrite of the test for class Score, which is
  one of the core storage classes of WoT's data model.
  It is a simple class but used very much so decent tests are still a
  good idea.
  It has got 94% line coverage and 89 % branch coverage.
  Previously line coverage of this was 75%, branch coverage 58%.
  The new test is 1190 lines long itself, the old one was merely 138.
  So while the old test did have a high coverage level, it probably
  didn't check most of the behavior of the stuff it happened to cause
  to execute - remember: coverage percentages only say what is executed,
  not whether it is actually tested.
  When designing the new test I tried to test every aspect of the code
  no matter how unlikely to fail it seems.
  This gives us good insurance against future bogus modifications, which
  could for example happen when we migrate from db4o to a different
  database.

  The few percents which are missing towards 100% are due to not testing
  deprecated code; and due to the fact that the Ant builder of WoT does
  not support Mockito yet - without it we cannot cause the internal
  failures required to cover the remaining branches.
  A bug has been filed to address this in the future:
  https://bugs.freenetproject.org/view.php?id=6915

  As a result of reviewing and testing almost every aspect of class
  Score, various non-critical bugs in Score and other core classes were
  detected and fixed:
  - Minor performance improvement: Remove useless synchronization of all
    the getters / setters at Score and Trust
  - Make IdentityID / TrustID / ScoreID detect too short IDs
  - Remove incompliant hashCode() there
  - Unify toString() of core classe to get coherent logging
  - Fix creation date of Score not always being strictly equal to date
    of modification after creation
  - Provide replacement for deprecated function at Score
  - Score.setCapacity(): Check whether capacity is legal
  - Score.getDateOfCreation(): Remove duplicate function
  - Score.clone(): Fix to copy mVersionID
  - Score.startupDatabaseIntegrityTest(): Check mCapacity and mVersionID
  - Main class WebOfTrust: Document what capacities are, provide array
    with all valid ones
  - DateUtil: New class to provide waitUntilCurrentTimeUTCIsAfter(),
    useful for unit tests
  - AbstractJUnit4BaseTest: Migrate more functions from the JUnit 3
    predecessor of this class

  Irrelevant but interesting random statistics: The tested class Score
  itself is 540 lines of code. Comparing that to the 1190 lines of
  test code for it shows that the metric for how long full unit tests
  are typically may be "twice as much as the tested code itself."

- 0006967: [Code quality] Unit tests: Introduce finite memory limit of
           512 MB (xor)

  Previously there was no memory limit for the unit tests at all, they
  could consume as much memory as they pleased / as the default Java
  memory limit of the current machine allowed them to.

  The 512 MB memory limit was determined by running ~ 10 iterations of
  the tests with 4GB, 512 MB, 384 MB and 256 MB.

  The runtime average wasn't significantly different for any of those
  so there is no excessive garbage collection happening and 512 MB
  should be  enough for now and leave some leeway for new tests.

  This is also intended as a service to people who use Freenet on a
  Raspberry Pi - being able to build WoT there is a first step towards
  ensuring it works with the hardware constraints of the Pi.
  Along with the decrease of memory / CPU usage because of the
  IdentityFetcher-rewrite of this release WoT may nowadays actually just
  work fine on a Pi. Feedback is welcome :)

  FYI you can use e.g. jVisualVM to watch the memory usage and GC
  activity of Freenet.

- 0006929: [Bugs] Travis CI builds fail due to changes at fred (xor)

  The .travis.yml configuration of Travis CI has been fixed to be
  compatible to the huge changeset of the Freenet core fred which is
  being developed on fred's next branch.
  Specifically it was adapted to be compatible with the new Gradle
  builder of fred which has replaced Ant there - while keeping Ant at
  WoT so we don't have too much migration efforts going on for now.

  The unit tests of WoT branch next do succeed against the new fred code
  so hopefully WoT won't delay the release of the fred changes any
  further than they have already been delayed.
  This also the first time where the "CI" = continuous integration
  in Travis CI is really happening to meet its definition:
  I don't have a Gradle build setup for fred branch next yet so it is of
  true benefit to be able to test it elsewhere :)
  Thanks to nextgens for insipiring this by setting up Travis CI at
  fred!

Thanks to:
  - ArneBab
  - nextgens

Links:
  [1] https://...
